---
uid: 6038bc5002ab0da0b5f15d8b8de5fc0a
title: Second Order Equations
course_id: >-
  res-18-009-learn-differential-equations-up-close-with-gilbert-strang-and-cleve-moler-fall-2015
type: course
layout: course_section
parent_title: Differential Equations and Linear Algebra
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: 6038bc5002ab0da0b5f15d8b8de5fc0a
    name: Second Order Equations
    weight: 50
    parent: 75be594286fc61820f93147523356fe2
is_media_gallery: true
---
{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/second-order-equations" section="Second Order Equations" title="Second Order Equations" description="Description: For the oscillation equation with no damping and no forcing, all solutions share the same natural frequency. Related section in textbook : 2.1 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/xCCeV-glFdM/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/forced-harmonic-motion" section="Second Order Equations" title="Forced Harmonic Motion" description="Description: When the forcing is a sinusoidal input, like a cosine, one particular solution has the same form. But if the forcing frequency equals the natural frequency there is resonance. Related section in textbook : 2.1b Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/zkFZY6esNOU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/unforced-damped-motion" section="Second Order Equations" title="Unforced Damped Motion" description="Description: With constant coefficients in a differential equation, the basic solutions are exponentials. The exponent solves a simple equation. Related section in textbook : 2.3 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/zqks_JcU0cM/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/impulse-response-and-step-response" section="Second Order Equations" title="Impulse Response and Step Response" description="Description: The impulse response is the solution when the force is an impulse (a delta function). This also solves a null equation (no force) with a nonzero initial condition. Related section in textbook : 2.3c Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/PoHO4PZtW78/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/exponential-response-2013-possible-resonance" section="Second Order Equations" title="Exponential Response – Possible Resonance" description="Description: Resonance occurs when the natural frequency matches the forcing frequency—equal exponents from inside and outside. Related section in textbook : 2.4 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/o93axeQJqJ8/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/second-order-equations-with-damping" section="Second Order Equations" title="Second Order Equations with Damping" description="Description: A damped forced equation has a sinusoidal solution with exponential decay. The damping ratio provides insight into the null solutions. Related section in textbook : 2.4b Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/SMQPt7t0bHk/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/electrical-networks-voltages-and-currents" section="Second Order Equations" title="Electrical Networks: Voltages and Currents" description="Description: Current flowing around an RLC loop solves a linear equation with coefficients L (inductance), R (resistance), and 1/C ( C = capacitance). Related section in textbook : 2.5 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/6b9AW6QxXt0/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/method-of-undetermined-coefficients" section="Second Order Equations" title="Method of Undetermined Coefficients" description="Description: With constant coefficients and special forcing terms (powers of t, cosines / sines, exponentials), a particular solution has this same form. Related section in textbook : 2.6 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/mKYlNJhK_2o/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/an-example-of-undetermined-coefficients" section="Second Order Equations" title="An Example of Undetermined Coefficients" description="Description: This method is also successful for forces and solutions equal to polynomials times exponentials. Substitute into the equation! Related section in textbook : 2.6b Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/u_XsCvhzzbg/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/variation-of-parameters" section="Second Order Equations" title="Variation of Parameters" description="Description: Combine null solutions to find a particular solution for any right hand side. But it may involve a difficult integral. Related section in textbook : 2.6c Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/0f15AVSQ770/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/laplace-transform-first-order-equation" section="Second Order Equations" title="Laplace Transform: First Order Equation" description="Description: Transform each term in the linear differential equation to create an algebra problem. You can transform the algebra solution back to the ODE solution. Related section in textbook : 2.7 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/9RJml41PFnc/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/laplace-transform-second-order-equation" section="Second Order Equations" title="Laplace Transform: Second Order Equation" description="Description: The algebra problem involves the transfer function. The poles of that function are all-important. Related section in textbook : 2.7b Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/kcLc4FsshO4/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/second-order-equations/laplace-transforms-and-convolution" section="Second Order Equations" title="Laplace Transforms and Convolution" description="Description: When the input force is an impulse, the output is the impulse response. For all inputs the response is a convolution with the impulse response. Related section in textbook : 2.7c Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/WZMQdLW4COQ/default.jpg" >}}