---
uid: 84dd94ec46fe8e5999805e44f82c636f
title: Graphical and Numerical Methods
course_id: >-
  res-18-009-learn-differential-equations-up-close-with-gilbert-strang-and-cleve-moler-fall-2015
type: course
layout: course_section
parent_title: Differential Equations and Linear Algebra
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: 84dd94ec46fe8e5999805e44f82c636f
    name: Graphical and Numerical Methods
    weight: 60
    parent: 75be594286fc61820f93147523356fe2
is_media_gallery: true
---
{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/graphical-and-numerical-methods/pictures-of-solutions" section="Graphical and Numerical Methods" title="Pictures of Solutions" description="Description: The direction field has an arrow with slope at each point coming from the differential equation. Arrows with the same slope lie along an isocline. Related section in textbook : 3.1 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/cDfWtSqGiBY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/graphical-and-numerical-methods/phase-plane-pictures-source-sink-saddle" section="Graphical and Numerical Methods" title="Phase Plane Pictures: Source, Sink, Saddle" description="Description: Solutions to second order equations can approach infinity or zero. Saddle points have a positive and also a negative exponent or eigenvalue. Related section in textbook : 3.2 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/VqXKa11IA6A/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/graphical-and-numerical-methods/phase-plane-pictures-spirals-and-centers" section="Graphical and Numerical Methods" title="Phase Plane Pictures: Spirals and Centers" description="Description: Imaginary exponents with pure oscillation provide a “center” in the phase plane. The point (position, velocity) travels forever around an ellipse. Related section in textbook : 3.2b Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/n9H-6TQIEJc/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/graphical-and-numerical-methods/two-first-order-equations-stability" section="Graphical and Numerical Methods" title="Two First Order Equations: Stability" description="Description: A second order equation gives two first order equations. The matrix becomes a companion matrix (triangular). Related section in textbook : 3.2c Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/fd7ioT_wwPE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/graphical-and-numerical-methods/linearization-at-critical-points" section="Graphical and Numerical Methods" title="Linearization at Critical Points" description="Description: A critical point is a constant solution to the differential equation. The slope of the right hand side decides stability or instability. Related section in textbook : 3.3 Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/0hx59wYpFyY/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/graphical-and-numerical-methods/linearization-of-two-nonlinear-equations" section="Graphical and Numerical Methods" title="Linearization of two nonlinear equations" description="Description: With two equations,  the two linearized equations use the 2 by 2 matrix of partial derivatives of the right hand sides. Related section in textbook : 3.3b Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/N6pc8Axv3Gs/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/graphical-and-numerical-methods/eigenvalues-and-stability-2-by-2-matrix-a" section="Graphical and Numerical Methods" title="Eigenvalues and Stability: 2 by 2 Matrix, A" description="Description: Two equations with a constant matrix are stable (solutions approach zero) when the trace is negative and the determinant is positive. Related section in textbook : 3.3c Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/GAOjfd5QJZE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/differential-equations-and-linear-algebra/graphical-and-numerical-methods/the-tumbling-box-in-3-d" section="Graphical and Numerical Methods" title="The Tumbling Box in 3-D" description="Description: A box in the air can rotate stably around its shortest and longest axes. Around the middle axis it tumbles wildly. Related section in textbook : 3.3d Instructor: Prof. Gilbert Strang" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/Jy5XpZqy56U/default.jpg" >}}